---
title: "A Guide to dwm on Debian"
date: 2019-06-27T16:48:47-05:00
type: "post"
slug: "dwm"
draft: false
---

Like most people, my first Linux distribution was Ubuntu. As time passed, I
became interested in finding quality software that does exactly what it
needs to do and nothing more. Naturally this led me to try other distros,
each with a different desktop environment. When I discovered that you can run
a window manager without a desktop environment, I was hooked. At first I used
i3, and eventually I found dwm, a minimalist window manager whose source code
is not intended to exceed 2000 lines. This makes it possible to quickly read
and understand the source code.

This will be a guide to installing and configuring dwm and a few related
programs on a fresh Debian install without any desktop environment. If you
already have a desktop environment installed, it is possible to have both
options installed and available, but it requires additional steps that won't
be covered here.

The best resource for learning about dwm is the [documentation](https://dwm.suckless.org/).
Because dwm is not as popular as awesome or i3, you'll have a hard time finding
answers to your questions on Stack Overflow. You're better off reading the docs
or trying to figure it out on your own, which is doable considering the
simplicity and small size of the program.

## Download

First we need to download dwm. Replace the version number as needed. I will
also download st, a terminal emulator, and dmenu, a program to quickly launch
executables. Both of these make dwm more usable.

```
wget https://dl.suckless.org/dwm/dwm-6.2.tar.gz
wget https://dl.suckless.org/st/st-0.8.2.tar.gz
wget https://dl.suckless.org/tools/dmenu-4.9.tar.gz
```

Then we extract each one.

```
tar xf dwm-6.2.tar.gz
tar xf st-0.8.2.tar.gz
tar xf dmenu-4.9.tar.gz
```

## Install

If you ever download software and don't know what to do with it, always read
the README first. dwm's README is short and helpful.

On Debian, at least when I ran through these steps, there was no need to make
changes to config.mk. Run `sudo make clean install` in the root directory of
dwm, where the Makefile is. Chances are there will be some missing
dependencies. When I ran it, I had to do the following:

```
sudo apt install make gcc libx11-dev libxft-dev libxinerama-dev xorg
```

However, it's best to install dependencies one at a time and then rerun
`sudo make clean install` until it works so that you don't install things that
you don't need.

Next, create a file called .xinitrc in your home directory. Place this inside
of it:

```
while xsetroot -name "`date` `uptime | sed 's/.*,//'`"
do
	sleep 1
done &
exec dwm
```

Only the last line is necessary. The other lines display the date and the load
average over the last 15 minutes in the top right corner. You can change this
to be whatever you want. Battery percentage is helpful if you're using a
laptop. Get creative.

Once you create that file, run the command `startx` to launch dwm.

Defer to the [dwm tutorial](https://dwm.suckless.org/tutorial/) for a complete
list of commands.

## st and dmenu

The steps to configure and install st and dmenu are very similar. In fact,
running `sudo make clean install` on each should be all you need to do.

## Configure

One thing about dwm that most people think is weird is that you have to edit
the source code to customize it instead of editing a configuration file.
Unless you change things daily, this isn't an issue as compiling takes only
a few seconds. To be fair, it's not really source code that you're editing.
It's a C header file with some variables.

To configure dwm, copy config.def.h to config.h and make your changes in
config.h. Then run `sudo make clean install`.

If dwm feels too minimalist for you, don't leave just yet. Many people have
submitted [patches](https://dwm.suckless.org/patches/) that add more
functionality. All you need to do to apply a patch is download the patch
into the root directory of dwm and run `git apply name-of-file.diff`.
But applying patches haphazardly could become a mess! Luckily, there is a guide to
[managing your configuration with Git](https://dwm.suckless.org/customisation/patches_in_git/).

## Exercise for the reader

At this point, you may wonder how you're going to control sound volume and
screen brightness now that there is no icon on the taskbar that you can click
on and now that some keys no longer work as they did when you had a full
desktop environment. There is no one solution, so situations like this force
you to learn and find what works best for your workflow.
