---
title: "Pick<Type, Keys> in TypeScript"
date: 2020-09-05T20:46:34-05:00
type: "post"
slug: "pick"
draft: false
---

The basics of TypeScript are easy if you know JavaScript. In JavaScript, each
variable has a type. Because JavaScript is a dynamically typed language, there
is no way to force a variable to be a certain type. A variable that holds a
value of type `number` can be reassigned to a value of type `string`, and
neither you nor the interpreter can do anything about it.

The eight data types are:

- `number`
- `bigint` (introduced in ECMAScript 2020)
- `string`
- `boolean`
- `null`
- `undefined`
- `object`
- `symbol`

`function` is also a type because the `typeof` operator will respond with
`function` when you write something like `typeof function () {}`. Since
functions in JavaScript are first-class, meaning they can be passed around like
values and assigned to variables, this makes sense.

It's not surprising then that TypeScript allows you to declare variables as
these data types.

```
const height: number = 3;
const spaceTowerHeight: bigint = 9007199254740991n;
const food: string = 'apple';
const pass: boolean = false;
const aNull: null = null;
const whyWouldYouWantThis: undefined = undefined;
const obj: object = { one: 1 };
const foodSymbol: symbol = Symbol(food);
```

It's when you start diving deeper into the type system that you discover types
you never knew existed.

Let's take a look at one of these, the `Pick<Type, Keys>` type. It's in the
category of utility types, which are there to help you transform existing types.
We'll look at an example that makes use of some other features of TypeScript
along the way.

First, let's define a type called `Hour` which will allow one of the numbers
that we specify. We can imagine that it's for a day schedule, using the 12-hour
clock.

```
type Hour = 8 | 9 | 10 | 11 | 12 | 1 | 2 | 3 | 4;
```

Now suppose we have a course with some information about it, including the
start and end hour of the course. We model it like this:

```
interface Course {
    id: number,
    title: string,
    startTime: Hour,
    endTime: Hour,
}
```

In some views, we may not care about the `id`, which we can suppose is used
for internal reference purposes. We can "pick" the properties that we want and
create a new type out of the interface.

```
type CoursePreview = Pick<Course, 'title' | 'startTime' | 'endTime'>;
```

With these types, we can create one more interface and then an object that
adheres to all the type requirements we've created.

```
interface Student {
    name: string,
    schedulePreview: Array<CoursePreview>,
}

const s: Student = {
    name: "Bob",
    schedulePreview: [{title: 'English 101', startTime: 2, endTime: 4}]
}
```

TypeScript has a comprehensive type system that even includes features like
`Pick` which help you transform types.
