---
title: "On book recommendations"
date: 2020-06-13T20:27:00-05:00
type: "post"
slug: "books"
draft: false
---

There's a great tool called [stack.app](https://stack.app/u/john/books), which
I use to keep track of book I've read. It's like Goodreads but without the
bloat. I made a rule for myself that I would only list books that I would
recommend to others, so that keeping track of the books wouldn't become a chore.

## What does it mean to recommend a book?

I thought about the context in which I read these books, and how these books
seem amazing to me, full of insight. This context, however, only makes sense
for a small subset of the entire population of people that I could recommend
books to. People who are not looking to build new technology products might
find that Peter Thiel's *Zero to One* is not applicable to them. They might
learn about another person's perspective, but it wouldn't be the greatest book
they have ever read.

Even within a narrow field, it might do you well to dismiss some
recommendations. Like computer programming, for example. Maybe there's a
technique for software development that a friend thinks you should learn about.
But what if you're already a step ahead, having actually used that technique at
your previous job? It might tempt you to read a formal book about the technique,
but reading a book is a considerable investment of your time. Spending an hour
discussing the book with the friend, before reading it, might save you from ten
hours of reading if you discover during the discussion that you've already
learned the technique.

If, after the discussion, you find that this book will potentially be useful,
there's no harm done. You gave your friend a chance to explain what they have
learned, and you can read the book afterwards.

## The lesson

At a certain point, **working smarter becomes the only way to make progress**.
One person might read several books a week, and another might read only one. If
that one book is chosen carefully, then the **net result is usually greater**.

This is a **shift from short-term thinking to long-term thinking** in which you
evaluate not only the immediate results, but also the future ones.

This comes up a lot in software development in the form of technical debt,
where it might seem good in the moment to choose the 20 minute solution over
the 8 hour one. The problem arises when that 20 minute solution has certain
drawbacks that eat away hours later, often many multiples of the amount of time
that the original "long" solution would have taken.

In many areas of life, putting in a little more time right now often saves
a lot of time in the future. It's just so hard for us to do this because for
thousands of years, humans never had the opportunity to think about anything
other than their immediate needs.
