---
title: "Working for vs working with"
date: 2021-11-21
type: "post"
slug: "for-vs-with"
draft: false
---

*Also in [简体中文](https://xiaobiji.co/和人一起工作与为人工作相比/)*

There are two ways to work. You can work for someone, or you can work with
someone. Neither is better than the other, but they both have their own nuances.

When you're working for someone, there's a distance between you and the person
or entity that you're working for. As long as you show up and get the work done,
there's not much else required for the act of working to be considered a
success.

When you're working with someone, the dynamic is different. It's harder to show
up, do the work, and call it good. There's often a degree to which you're
involved in larger decisions, whether or not you're aware of it.

Take a company like Amazon, for example. At such scale, pretty much every point
of work becomes an act of working for, even if you think otherwise. One way to
measure this might be how easily you can be replaced by another worker. In
almost all positions at such a large organization, there's enough fragmentation
that anyone could be replaced by another person who can perform the same work.
This includes everyone from a marketing executive to a person packing boxes. It
may be the case that you're working "with" a team to achieve a goal at a large
organization, but in the end, you're working with the team which is working for
the larger organization.

Most small companies, which I'd say are 50 people or less, tend towards the side
of individuals working "with" others and not really "for" anyone besides the
customers. The smaller you go, the more likely it is that you're working with
and not for. It's not always the case, though. You could certainly work at a
small place and understand that it's strictly a "working for" relationship.
Sometimes they need to have a project completed and need to hire someone to do
it.

Take the example of [Nota](https://nota.md). If that link no longer goes
anywhere, you can replace it with any other small company which has a few people
running it from day one. Nota is a note taking application created and run by
two people. The small team behind it is working "with" each other to build and
market the note taking app. Going back to our measurement of working with-ness,
what happens if one of these two people leave? That person is nearly impossible
to replace. In our case study, it appears that they have known and worked with
each other for a long time before creating Nota, and the idea was born out of
solving nuanced problems that both of them faced. It's easy enough to hire
another developer to work at Amazon. It's not feasible to hire a replacement
friend whose workflow problems have influenced and guided the creation of a new
product with you.

To reiterate, one style of working is not better than the other. They each have
their place, and you might prefer one over another, but it's good to be aware of
where you are on the continuum.
