---
title: "My upload script is 176 times faster than Travis CI"
date: 2021-10-30
type: "post"
slug: "ci"
draft: false
---

For the longest time, I used Travis CI to run builds on my code and perform
actions like deploying this blog. I don't remember how exactly I first came
across it, but it was probably because Travis CI was one of the few solutions
out there at the time.

Fast forward to today, I went on there to see if I had any projects still using
Travis CI, and what do you know, new website! Apparently they had been acquired
two years ago by a company called Idera, which seems to be in the business of
acquiring developer tools that are going out of business. I didn't even know.

I had switched this blog from being deployed through Travis CI to using a small
shell script that I run manually.

I switched because once in a while the builds would fail for random reasons, and
it took unreasonably long for something that I know can run much faster.

I could tolerate the failed builds, but I could not tolerate waiting 5 minutes
for something that should take seconds.

There were many hoops to jump through for code being deployed through Travis CI.
The code would be pushed to GitHub, then Travis CI would take however long it
needs to detect the new commits, then it would spin up a virtual machine, clone
the repo, run the Hugo binary, which I had to include in this repo, and finally
run my deploy script. All the authentication between the pieces also took some
time.

Last but not least, it always had the nerve to fail builds right before they are
done, saying

```
pgrep: invalid user name: john
```

which I could not figure out how to fix, but I at least was able to make it not
fail.

It averaged about 37 seconds per build. Not bad, but 21.8 times slower than it
is with my own script, which for today's blog post took 1.7 seconds.

What was it doing the other 4 minutes? I don't know.

I wrote a shell script, and in about 30 lines of Bash, including comments and
empty lines, this blog deployed in about a second. At the core, the script does
the same stuff that Travis CI did. That is, build the static site and transfer
the files to a remote server, and a little bit of cleanup.

Although I have to run it manually (and it would be trivial to make it run on
every commit using Git hooks), it feels so good to get rid of everything else in
the way of doing the actual work. Running it manually is not even that big of a
problem since I update the site infrequently. The upside is that my changes are
live seconds after I run the script. I don't have to sit around for 5 minutes
waiting for Travis CI to start my build. I see the results right away.

I have to admit that GitHub Actions is way faster than many of these older CI
tools, but there's just something about having 30 lines do all the work that
makes it feel so robust and maintainable. The only dependencies are the Hugo
binary installed on my computer, `rsync`, and the shell itself. There's no Go
Docker image, no lines of Ruby (Travis CI) between GitHub and the end result.

When I run this script I know it will work and that it will be fast, and I've
found that people generally like those two things.
