---
title: "I tried npm install after a few years, and this is what happened"
date: 2022-05-15T11:21:10-05:00
type: "post"
slug: "server-upgrade"
draft: false
---

The other day, I finally got around to updating the very server that this blog
lives on, alongside a few other pet projects.

I set this server up 4 years ago, running Ubuntu 16.04. I recall that I did
this once before as well, upgrading from Ubuntu 14.04 or something. What's
*this* that I did? I remember that after about 10 minutes of research, I
figured it was faster, easier, and less painful to simply create a new virtual
machine, install a web server, and copy my files over, so that's what I did.

This time, I thought I'd try out Ubuntu's built-in upgrade capability. After
all, whenever I would SSH in, I'd always be reminded that it's as easy as
`do-release-upgrade`. I just ignored it over and over. My little virtual
machine seemed to chug along just fine without an upgrade. When Ubuntu 22.04
came out, I felt it was time to upgrade.

I knew that trouble was cooking when `do-release-upgrade` started spitting out
error messages a few seconds into the process. Apparently I had waited too long
to upgrade, and I would have to manually add a few lines to my sources.list to
make it work.

That seemed to fix the first issue, so I continued through a few smaller error
messages, conflicting dependencies, and so on. Each time, I thought for sure it
might start the upgrade process without running into yet another error message,
and each time I was disappointed. This is exactly what I must have experienced
the first time, because I decided that, rather than wait for the endless error
messages to cease, it would be easier, once again, to start fresh.

I'm glad I did, because in the meantime it seems that the industry stopped
offering the tiny 512 MB virtual machine, so for the same price I now have a
whole 1 GB of memory! That's when it hit me how long this thing had been
running, and how much time has passed since I set it up.

For the new virtual machine, I went with Debian so that it would be a little
less bloated. Setting up the new VM was a breeze, but while moving some old
projects over, I was given one final reminder of how software rots surprisingly
fast, and why it's good to not over-engineer things.

I had [one little project](https://github.com/johnjago/musearch), that didn't
even do much, not make it to the new server.

It's such a harmless little thing, just a small website, whose dependencies
choked it one final time.

To make it look good, and for its layout to be functional, I used a CSS
framework.

I assume this CSS framework, at least back in the day, required Sass to build
the final stylesheet.

To facilitate the build process, I used Gulp, a tool which was the hottest
thing at the time, so that must have been the reason why I intertwined it with
this project. Today it's hilariously outdated in a software timescale, not
having had a release since May 2019.

Alright, time to build the files so that I can host it on my new server. I
haven't changed the code, so it should still work, right?

A few

```
npm WARN old lockfile The package-lock.json file was created with an old version of npm,
npm WARN old lockfile so supplemental metadata must be fetched from the registry.
```

was expected.

Then came the slew of messages from package maintainers who have gone on to
other things.

Then it exploded with

```
npm ERR! gyp ERR! stack Error: Command failed: /usr/bin/python -c import sys; print "%s.%s.%s" % sys.version_info[:3];
```

Ah, yes, we can all guess what that means.

```
SyntaxError: Missing parentheses in call to 'print'. Did you mean print(...)?
```

It's a gravestone of a five year struggle to finally stop supporting Python 2,
which at last happened in 2020, twelve years after the release of Python 3.

What does that have to do with my Node.js packages?

I could probably figure out, but like my server, sometimes it's easier to nuke
the whole thing and start fresh.

The next time I build a project like this, I'll keep in mind that one day the
dependencies will come back to haunt me, so I'd better have as few as possible.

If it takes only a few short years to cripple software like this, then maybe
that's

```
not ok
```

as the last line of output in my attempt at `npm i` suggested.
