---
title: "Feedback fuels progress"
date: 2023-01-28T10:28:53-06:00
type: "post"
slug: "feedback-fuels-progress"
draft: false
---

Have you wondered how some people expand their skills seemingly without bounds,
and do it faster than others? They've already got a solid grasp, yet tomorrow
they'll be even better. Maybe you've seen a company have one success after
another, or a dog learn tricks that you wouldn't have thought possible.

These things don't happen without effort. What seems easy from the outside
might be incredibly difficult on the inside. However, the one thing these
people, companies, and even dogs have in common is that they receive feedback
fast, they're open to the feedback, and they make use of that feedback to
improve their next move. That's what makes the difference.

If you're serious about improving, you need to get feedback. You need to get it
fast, you need to be receptive to it, and you need to take action based on that
feedback.

Let's look at an example.

If you're learning how to start a fire while camping in the woods, you could go
by yourself and try different things until a fire starts. If you are a complete
beginner, you'll probably try a lot of things before you make any progress. It
might be frustrating depending on your attitude, and it will certainly be slow.

On the other hand, you could go there with a friend who already knows how to
make a campfire. The goal is still for you to learn, so your friend won't tell
you step-by-step how to do it. Otherwise, you won't build up the memory for it.
But your friend will tell you when your approach is wrong. Perhaps you're
arranging the firewood in a way that's not optimal, so your friend will suggest
to do it another way.

At this point, you have a choice, a choice that most people struggle with. You
could admit that your approach is wrong and try your friend's method, or you
could ignore the advice, thinking that your way is still the best. Most people
are stubbornâ€”they resist change and will persist in their way. They don't want
to be seen as incompetent and would rather continue doing it their way than
admit their effort was misguided. Even worse, the longer they've been doing
something in a wrong or ineffective way, the harder it is to admit that it was
wrong, because they would rather believe the time was not wasted.  That's why
it's important to seek feedback as early as possible, so that you have less to
lose. In any case, without admitting that you were wrong, the feedback you
receive is essentially thrown away.

Lastly, you need to put in effort, sometimes a significant amount,
based on that feedback. You might have cut down an entire tree, cut up logs
from it, and are trying to use those big logs as firewood. Your friend tells
you that the logs are too big, and that you need to chop them into smaller
pieces so there's more surface area to burn. It's going to be a lot of work to
correct your course in some situations, but if you do it, you'll be heading in
the right direction.

Of course, if your friend told you earlier about the big logs, you could have
scrapped that approach right away and collected some twigs instead. The shorter
the feedback loop, the less wasted time and the faster the improvement. Places
with fast feedback loops are excellent learning environments.

Multiple, small projects in quick succession also create this environment of
fast feedback. You could spend time making the largest campfire in the world,
but you won't have time to experience the whole cycle of making a campfire more
than once. If you go through the whole cycle many times, you can apply what you
learned in the previous one to the next one. You don't have that environment if
you only have one cycle.

Another source of fast feedback can be your tools. If you choose, or make, your
tools wisely, they'll give as much feedback as a person guiding you along. This
is [easily seen when creating software](https://youtu.be/PUv66718DII?t=94). The
longer you have to wait to see the results of your code, the slower your
progress will be. Obvious, but it's surprising the delays that most people have
in their workflow.

In science, a hypothesis is "an idea that proposes a tentative explanation
about a phenomenon or a narrow set of phenomena observed in the natural world".
When you test a hypothesis, which would be better? To know the results of the
experiment in two minutes, or two years? Some experiments do require years of
waiting, but in any scenario, it's ideally the shortest wait possible, so that
you can reject the hypothesis and move on to the next.

Take feedback openly and put in effort, and it will be no surprise what fuels
progress.
